---
layout: comments
title: Ponder This in Go
---

IBM has a monthly [Ponder this][pt] challenge. The [December challenge][dec]
was straightforward to solve using Go. My code is [on GitHub][gh].

Read the challenge page for the details of the problem. If we call the row and
column sums of a bit matrix its "signature," my solution simply iterates over
all matrices of a given size, calculates the signature of each, and counts the
number of times it has seen each signature in a map. Go's advantage over C in
this problem is native hash tables (the map type).

Since the problem limited the matrix to 50 bits, it was simple to represent
it in a 64-bit word. To efficiently calculate row counts, I precomputed
population counts for all bytes. For columns, I created a table where each
byte is expanded to a 64-bit word by inserting seven 0s between each bit, so
that I can do pocketed addition for the columns.

My original plan was to investigate small cases by hand, and then try to
generalize the pattern so that I could handcraft a solution. Since the problem
was limited to 50 bit matrices, I suspected the smallest solution would be ~40
bits, and therefore too big for my laptop to find (by counting 2^40 matrices).
However, the smallest solutions are just 24 bits (4x6), and my program runs in
5 seconds. I also found the 25 bit solutions (in about 10 seconds).

One final curious note. I noticed that many of the solutions looked similar.
At least for the two matrix sizes that I calculated, all the solutions are
essentially the same. To convert one to another, apply a row permutation and
column permutation, and possibly invert the entire matrix. If we consider
these solutions equivalent, I'm curious how large a matrix would be required
to generate two distinct solutions.

[pt]: http://domino.research.ibm.com/Comm/wwwr_ponder.nsf/pages/index.html
[dec]: http://domino.research.ibm.com/Comm/wwwr_ponder.nsf/Challenges/December2014.html
[gh]: https://github.com/JStech/ponder-dec-14
