---
layout: comments
title: Hanabi AI
published: false
---

[Hanabi][ha] is a card game that my friends and I have recently gotten into.
It's cooperative and you hold your cards face out, so you can see everyone
else's cards but your own. As a team, you're trying to communicate the best
plays to each other, although the game limits how much you can say.

I've come up with a Hanabi strategy for the five player game that is somewhat
complicated, but I suspect is capable of winning nearly all of the time. It's
complicated enough that I won't try to explain it here (I'm not even going to
explain the game). It's also deterministic, and not computationally
difficult---it's at least conceivable that humans could play it, although it'd
take practice to learn.

So of course I decided it'd just be easier to program the computer to play it.
Now I'm one long weekend and 500 lines deep, and I haven't managed to win a game
yet. I've learned a lot in the process---I previously hadn't done any object
oriented programming in Go, and now I feel like a master of interfaces.

I've also come to appreciate just how smart humans are. One aspect of my
strategy involves expecting another player to take a particular action, and then
adjusting one's own plan if they don't. That sentence took 23 words, and 138
characters. It could be a tweet. I haven't even started to figure out how I
should implement it. (Actually, now that I write this, I think I know what to
do.)

Anyway, if you want to know more, my code is [on Github][gh].

[ha]: http://www.amazon.com/dp/B00CYQ9Q76?tag=stechschulten-20
[gh]: https://github.com/JStech/hanabi-ai
